64. O, that thou wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains
might flow down at thy presence, as when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the
waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble
at thy presence. When thou didst terrible things, which we looked not for, thou camest
down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence. For since the beginning of the world men have
not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside thee, what he hath
prepared for him that waiteth for him. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and worketh righteousness,
those that remember thee in thy ways. Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned in those in
and we shall be saved. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are
as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.
And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee,
for thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our iniquities. But now,
O Lord, thou art our Father, we are the clay, and thou our potter, and we all are the work of thy
hand. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity forever. Behold, see, we
are thy people, thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.
Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire,
and all our pleasant things are laid waste. Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things,
O Lord? Wilt thou hold thy peace and afflict us very sore?
Chapter 65. I am sought of them that ask not for me. I am found of them that sought me not.
I said, Behold me, behold me unto a nation that was not called by my name. I have spread out my
hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good after
their own thoughts. A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face, that sacrificeth
in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick, which remain among the graves, and lodge
in the monuments, which eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels,
which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in
my nose, a fire that burneth all the day. Behold, it is written before me, I will not keep silence,
but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom, your iniquities, and the iniquities of
your fathers together, saith the Lord, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed
me upon the hills. Therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom, thus saith the Lord,
as the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it.
So will I do for my servant's sake, that I may not destroy them all. And I will bring forth a
seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah, an inheritor of my mountains, and mine elect shall inherit it,
and my servant shall dwell there. And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Acre,
a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me. But ye are they that
forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that
furnish the drink offering unto that number. Therefore will I number you to the sword, and
ye shall all bow down to the slaughter. Because when I called, ye did not answer. When I spake,
ye did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.
Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry.
Behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty. Behold, my servants shall rejoice,
but ye shall be ashamed. Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow
of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my
chosen, for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name. That he who
blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth, and he that sweareth in the
earth shall swear by the God of truth, because the former troubles are forgotten, and because
they are hid from mine eyes. For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall
not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice forever in that which I create.
For behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, and I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people. And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his
days. For the child shall die and hundred years old, but the sinner being and hundred years old
shall be accursed. And they shall build their houses and inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build and another inhabit, they shall not plant
and another eat. For as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy
the work of their hands. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble. For they are
the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them. And it shall come to pass,
that before they call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear. The wolf and
shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpent's
meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountains, saith the Lord. Chapter 66
Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. Where is the
place of my rest? For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have been, saith
the Lord. But to this man I will look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembleth at my word. He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man. He that sacrificeth a lamb
is as if he cut off a dog's neck. He that offereth an oblation is as if he offered swine's blood.
He that burneth incense is as if he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways,
and their soul delighteth in their abominations. I also will choose their delusions,
and will bring their fears upon them, because when I called none did answer. When I spake
they did not hear, but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word, your brethren that hated you, that cast you
out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified. But he shall appear to your joy,
and they shall be ashamed. A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple,
a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies. Before she travailed, she brought
forth, before her pain came she was delivered of a man-child. Who hath heard such a thing?
Who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day,
or shall a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.
Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, saith the Lord? Shall I cause to bring
and shut the womb, saith thy God? Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her.
All ye that love her, rejoice for joy with her. All ye that mourn for her,
that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations,
that ye may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.
For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river,
and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream. Then shall ye suck, ye shall be born upon
her sides, and be dandled upon her knees. As one whom his mother comforteth, so I will comfort you,
and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice,
and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord shall be known
toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. For behold, the Lord will come with
fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke
with flames of fire. For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh,
and the slain of the Lord shall be many. They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves
in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination,
and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord. For I know their works,
and their thoughts. It shall come that I will gather all nations in tongues,
and they shall come and see my glory. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that
escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pole, and Ludd, that draw the bow, to Tubal,
and Javin, to the Isles afar off, that they have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory,
and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. And they shall bring all your brethren
for an offering unto the Lord, out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters,
and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord.
As the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel, into the house of the Lord.
And I will also take them for priests, and for Levites, saith the Lord. For as the new heavens,
and the new worth which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord,
so shall your seed and your name remain, and it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to
another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord.
And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed
against me, for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched,
and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.